                               ---------
                    Approximate bug list for RoadMap
                               ---------
                               ---------
                             September 2007


KNOWN BUGS

Desktop and rendering bugs:

 * Gtk2 interface reports error:

   The following error message appears:

   (gtkroadmap:3487): WARNING **: Invalid UTF8 string passed to
        pango_layout_set_text()

 * Long lines are sometimes incorrectly display.  The symptom is that
   all of a sudden a long straight line that you know isn't really present
   will appear from edge to edge of your screen.

 * Freeway rendering error:

   It happened once that a freeway was showing up without its normal
   shape. This cannot be reproduced consistently, through.

 * QT4 - The address find dialog doesnt work.
 
   Partial debugging shows that the form fields return pointers to good data,
   but it gets corrupted soon after.

 * QT3,QT4 - List dialogs broken
   
   In the "personal landmarks" list, the first landmark in the list is
   selected as soon as the mouse enters the dialog -- no button press
   necessary.  The second time it is brought up, RoadMap dumps core as soon as
   the mouse enters the dialog.  In QT3 the second selection behaves the same
   as the first (i.e.  no core dump), but it was built on a different machine,
   different compiler.

 * QT3,QT4 - no display periodic running

   Periodics seem to be attached to windows (?), the new periodic started in
   roadmap_display_initialize() doesn't commence.

 * QT3,QT4 - no signal handling

   No signal handling has been added to the QT versions.  This means user
   changes to routes and waypoints, and the track log, can easily be lost.

   (The GTK versions handle signals properly, and so RoadMap will shut down
   cleanly in the event of the user hitting ^C in the window from which
   RoadMap was started, or if RoadMap is killed with SIGTERM, as when the
   system is shutting down.)
   
Map building bugs:

 * The buildus tool does not use the regular map path:

   The buildus tool does not use the map path: it assumes all the map
   files are in the same directory.

 * Shape point are ignored when drawing polygons:

   The Tiger files define polygons as delineated by a list of lines.
   Any of these lines might be defined by a serie of shape points.

   RoadMap uses the shape points when drawing the lines, but not when
   filling the polygons.

Map data bugs:

 * City search is broken:

   The roadmap files include a table to convert a place into a county
   subdivision.  This table causes a lot of problems because places can span
   across county subdivisions, with name clashes.

 * The "address by ZIP" method does not work anymore:

   Since the automatic selection of the map, because the file usdir.rdm does
   not have yet any ZIP code location information (TBD).

   This feature has been hidden from the user interface  for now.

 * Street address conflicts:

   A few street address conflicts appears when building maps.  Some seems to
   be a TIGER map database problem.  Others might be caused by the address
   range format issue (see below).  A few still need to be investigated.

   NOTE:  3 of these addresses conflicts have been confirmed to be TIGER
   database errors by the census bureau.

 * Street numbers are not always numerical:

   Some street numbers include letters, which is not well supported by
   RoadMap:  in such a case, roadmap generates a street number which is hoped
   to be unique enough by converting the letter into a "number".

   This is a design problem that is not going to be solved any time soon. 
   Current kludge is deemed good enough for the time being, until someone give
   a practical case where this does not work.

 * Some urban areas are missing:

   For example:  Woodland Hills (in Los Angeles county).  This is a TIGER file
   problem:  the string "WOODLAND HILLS" never appears in the LA county files.

 * The maps for the state of Hawaii do not use the NAD83 datum:

   The offset can be significant (a few hundred feet), making these maps
   basically unusable for navigation.  The USGS bureau has announced that
   their maps of Hawaii are being redone using the NAD83 datum, lets hope the
   US Census Bureau will do the same.  [As of 2007, I don't know whether this
   is still true.  -pgf]

